
# The `popper.yml` configuration file

The `popper` command reads the `.popper.yml` file in the root of a 
project to figure out how to execute pipelines. While this file can be 
manually created and modified, the `popper` command makes changes to 
this file depending on which commands are executed.

The project folder we will use as example looks like the following:

```
$> tree -a -L 2 my-paper
my-paper/
├── .git
├── .popper.yml
├── paper
└── pipelines
    ├── arbitrary_stages
    ├── myanalysis
    └── myexp
```

That is, it contains three pipelines named `arbitrary_stages`, 
`myanalysis` and `myexp`. The `.popper.yml` for this project looks 
like:

```yaml
envs:
  myexp: ubuntu-16.04
  myanalysis: host
  arbitrary_stages: centos-7.2
  paper: host

metadata: 
  authors: Dennis Ritchie
  book: The C Programming Language

pipelines:
  paper:
    envs:
    - host
    path: paper
    stages:
    - build
  sample_pipeline:
    envs:
    - host
    path: pipelines/sample_pipeline
    stages:
    - setup
    - run
    - post-run
    - validate
    - teardown

popperized:
  - github/popperized
  - github/ivotron/quiho-popper

stages:
  myexp: [setup.sh, run.sh, post-run.sh, validate.sh, teardown.sh]
  myanalysis: [setup.sh, run.sh, validate.sh]
  arbitrary_stages: [preparation, execution, validation]
  paper: [build.sh]
```

At the top-level of the YAML file there are entries named `envs` and 
`stages`. For each of these, there are sub-entries for each pipeline 
(subfolders contained in the `pipelines` folder). A special `paper` 
pipeline corresponds to the one generating an (optional) manuscript.

## Environments

The `envs` entry in `.popper.yml` specifies the environment that a 
pipeline is used when the pipeline is executed as part of the `popper 
run` command. The available environments are:

  * `host`. The experiment is executed directly on the host.
  * `alpine-3.4`, `ubuntu-16.04` and `centos-7.2`. For each of these, 
    `popper check` is executed within a docker container whose base 
    image is the given Linux distribution name. The container has 
    `docker` available inside it so other containers can be executed 
    from within the `popper check` container.

The `popper init` command can be used to initialize a pipeline. By 
default, the `host` is registered when using `popper init`. The 
`--env` flag of `popper init` can be used to specify another 
environment. For example:

```bash
popper init mypipe --env=alpine-3.4
```

The above specifies that the pipeline named `mypipe` will be executed 
inside a docker container using the `alpine-3.4` popper check image.

To add more environment(s):  

```bash
popper env myexp --add ubuntu-xenial,centos-7.2
```

To remove enviroment(s):  

```bash
popper env myexp --rm centos-7.2
```

## Metadata

The `metadata` YAML entry specifies the set of data that gives information
about the user's project. It can be added using the `popper metadata --add command`
For example :

```bash
popper metadata --add authors='Dennis Ritchie'
```

This adds a metadata entry 'authors' to the the project
metadata.

To view the `metadata` of a repository type: 

```bash
popper metadata
```
To remove the entry 'authors' from the `metadata`:

```bash
popper metadata --rm authors
```

## Pipelines

The `pipelines` YAML entry specifies the details for all the available
pipelines. It gives us the information about -
   *  the environment(s) in which a pipeline can be executed
   *  the path to that pipeline
   *  the various stages that are present in it 

It gets updated automatically when a pipeline is initialized.

## Popperized

The `popperized` YAML entry specifies the list of available popperized 
pipelines in a GitHub organization. By default, it points to the 
`github/popperized` organization. The list forms the `search` dataset 
for the `popper search` command.

## Stages

The `stages` YAML entry specifies the sequence of stages that are 
executed by the `popper run` command. By default, the `popper init` 
command generates scaffold scripts for `setup.sh`, `run.sh`, 
`post-run.sh`, `validate.sh`, `teardown.sh`. If any of those are not
present when the pipeline is executed using `popper run`, they are 
just skipped (without throwing an error). At least one stage needs to
be executed, otherwise `popper run` throws an error.

If arbitrary names are desired for a pipeline, the `--stages` flag of 
the `popper init` command can be used. For example:

```bash
popper init arbitrary_stages \
  --stages 'preparation,execution,validation' \
```

The above line generates the configuration for the `arbitrary_stages` 
pipeline showed in the example.

Lastly, the special `paper` pipeline is generated by executing `popper 
init paper` and has by default a single stage named `build.sh`.
